[PXCT-1073] Tutorial from library - Uno R4 Capacitor Tutorial (#2559)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/02.hero/boards/uno-r4-wifi/tutorials/touch/content.md

---
title: Uno R4 Capacitor Tutorial
description: Learn to use the built-in capacitive sensing capabilities of the Arduino® Uno R4.
tags: [Arduino, Capacitive Sensing, Uno R4]
author: Pedro Lima
---

Capacitive sensing is a technology that detects changes in capacitance to determine the presence or absence of a conductive object, such as a human finger. This principle is widely used in touch-sensitive devices. The Arduino® Uno R4, both the [WiFi](https://store.arduino.cc/products/arduino-uno-r4-wifi) and [Minima](https://store.arduino.cc/products/arduino-uno-r4-minima) versions, come equipped with built-in capacitive sensing capabilities, making it easier to integrate touch inputs into your projects.

> ![Sensor Example](assets/Touch_Cover_001.gif)

Reviewer: I think we could add this as a duplicate after the example section, so it works as a nice visual addition of what to expect or how it would work. The image placement here is good because it shows the reader from the introduction what they are expecting to learn within the tutorial, so I think it would be nice to copy this line and add it next to the example section.

> 

Reviewer: Here I think we should add:

## Goals
### Required Hardware and Software

To show directly what are the goals of the tutorial, as well as  the hardware and software that would be used so the reader knows the requirements right at the beginning

| D0           | 9                          | 1                                | (1 << 1)                           |
| D1           | 8                          | 1                                | (1 << 0)                           |
| D2           | 34                         | 4                                | (1 << 2)                           |
| D3           | 13                         | 1                                | (1 << 5)                           |
| D8           | 11                         | 1                                | (1 << 3)                           |
| D9           | 2                          | 0                                | (1 << 2)                           |
| D11          | 10                         | 1                                | (1 << 2)                           |
| D13          | 12                         | 1                                | (1 << 4)                           |
| A1 (D15)     | 21                         | 2                                | (1 << 5)                           |
| A2 (D16)     | 22                         | 2                                | (1 << 6)                           |

> | LOVE_BUTTON  | 0                          | 0                                | (1 << 0)                           |

Reviewer: the lovebutton is a pin at bottom side of the minima right?

Author: Yhea

| LOVE_BUTTON  | 27                         | 3                                | (1 << 3)                           |

### Library Functions

The Arduino_CapacitiveTouch library provides several functions to work with capacitive touch inputs:

- **```CapacitiveTouch(uint8_t pin)```** Constructs a capacitive touch sensor for the given pin.
- **```bool begin()```** Initializes the sensor and configures the pin and hardware.
- **```int read()```** Reads the raw sensor value and returns it.
- **```bool isTouched()```** Checks if the sensor is touched based on the threshold.
- **```void setThreshold(int threshold)```** Sets the detection threshold for touch sensitivity.
- **```int getThreshold()```** Retrieves the current detection threshold.

For more detailed usage and examples, refer to the [CapacitiveSensor library documentation](https://docs.arduino.cc/libraries/capacitivesensor/).

## Example Code

Here's a simple example to get you started with capacitive sensing on the Uno R4.
For this example we are connecting a single piece of any conductive material to the pin ```D0``` on the Board.

> ![How to connect](assets/HoockupGuideExample.png)

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to move this to a separate and dedicated section, so the readers can assemble the hardware and understand how it works electrically. Then they can move to example section to upload the code and test it.

```Arduino IDE: Library Manager → Search "Arduino_CapacitiveTouch" → Install```

```ARDUINO
#include "Arduino_CapacitiveTouch.h"

CapacitiveTouch touchButton = CapacitiveTouch(D0);

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600);
  
  if(touchButton.begin()){
    Serial.println("Capacitive touch sensor initialized.");
  } else {
    Serial.println("Failed to initialize capacitive touch sensor. Please use a supported pin.");
    while(true);
  }

  touchButton.setThreshold(2000);
}

void loop() {
  int sensorValue = touchButton.read();
  Serial.print("Raw value: ");
  Serial.println(sensorValue);

  if (touchButton.isTouched()) {
    Serial.println("Button touched!");
  }
  
  delay(100);
}
```

## Creative Project Ideas
Now that you understand the basics, here are some project ideas:

**Touch-Controlled Night Light -** Create a lamp that turns on/off with a touch
**Capacitive Touch Piano -** Use multiple pins to create touch-sensitive keys
**Smart Home Controller -** Touch different areas to control various devices
**Interactive Art Installation -** Create touch-responsive visual or audio effects

## Conclusion

> The built-in capacitive sensing capabilities of the Arduino® Uno R4 provide an excellent way to add touch inputs to your projects. By leveraging the Arduino_CapacitiveTouch library, you can easily integrate touch-sensitive features, enhancing the interactivity and functionality of your designs. Whether you're building a simple touch interface or a more complex interactive system, the Uno R4's capacitive sensing features offer a versatile and user-friendly solution.
> Remember to experiment with threshold values and consider the environment where your project will be used, as factors like humidity and nearby electronics can affect sensitivity. With practice, you'll develop an intuitive understanding of how to tune these sensors for optimal performance in your specific applications.

Reviewer: I think here it would be nice to be more concise if possible, for example, like:

```suggestion
Capacitive sensing on the Arduino UNO R4 lets you add intuitive touch controls with minimal hardware, simply pair the board with the `Arduino_CapacitiveTouch` library. Tune the detection threshold for your environment (humidity, nearby electronics, etc.), and you can quickly scale from a single touch button to richer, multi-point interfaces.
```

It would also be nice to add Next Steps section if possible

---
title: UNO R4 Capacitive-Touch Tutorial.
difficulty: beginner
description: Learn to use the built-in capacitive sensing capabilities of the Arduino® UNO R4.
tags: [Arduino, Capacitive Sensing, UNO R4]
author: Pedro Lima
hardware:
  - hardware/02.hero/boards/uno-r4-wifi
  - hardware/02.hero/boards/uno-r4-minima
software:
  - ide-v2
  - web-editor
---

Capacitive sensing is a technology that detects changes in capacitance to determine the presence or absence of a conductive object, such as a human finger. This principle is widely used in touch-sensitive devices. The Arduino® UNO R4, both the [WiFi®](https://store.arduino.cc/products/arduino-uno-r4-wifi) and [Minima](https://store.arduino.cc/products/arduino-uno-r4-minima) versions, come equipped with built-in capacitive sensing capabilities, making it easier to integrate touch inputs into your projects.

![Sensor Example](assets/Touch_Cover_001.gif)

## Required Hardware

> To use the library you will need one of the compatible boards:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the library, you will need one of the compatible boards:
```
Minor suggestion

```arduino
#include "Arduino_CapacitiveTouch.h"

CapacitiveTouch touchButton = CapacitiveTouch(D0);

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600);
  
  if(touchButton.begin()){
    Serial.println("Capacitive touch sensor initialized.");
  } else {
    Serial.println("Failed to initialize capacitive touch sensor. Please use a supported pin.");
    while(true);
  }

  touchButton.setThreshold(2000);
}

void loop() {
  int sensorValue = touchButton.read();
  Serial.print("Raw value: ");
  Serial.println(sensorValue);

  if (touchButton.isTouched()) {
    Serial.println("Button touched!");
  }
  
  delay(100);
}
```

![Sensor Example](assets/Touch_Cover_001.gif)

## Creative Project Ideas

Now that you have learned the basics, here are some fun and interesting project ideas:

- **Touch-Controlled Night Light -** Create a lamp that turns on/off with a touch
- **Capacitive Touch Piano -** Use multiple pins to create touch-sensitive keys
- **Smart Home Controller -** Touch different areas to control various devices
- **Interactive Art Installation -** Create touch-responsive visual or audio effects

## Conclusion

> Capacitive sensing on the Arduino UNO R4 lets you add intuitive touch controls with minimal hardware, simply pair the board with the `Arduino_CapacitiveTouch` library. Tune the detection threshold for your environment (humidity, nearby electronics, etc.), and you can quickly scale from a single touch button to richer, multi-point interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capacitive sensing on the Arduino UNO R4 lets you add intuitive touch controls with minimal hardware. Simply pair the board with the `Arduino_CapacitiveTouch` library. Tune the detection threshold for your environment (such as humidity and nearby electronics), and you can quickly scale from a single-touch button to richer, multi-point interfaces.
```
Minor suggestion
